What did I do wrong? Am I doing the right thing? Am I being selfish? Am I risking my kids future? These were the thoughts in my head when I walked away from my marriage. I had my two sons and my old father with me and had to start my life all over again. Maybe that is another article on how to prepare for that, but this one is about dealing with the aftermath of having moved out. It is overwhelming to say the least. Everyone around is advising you and providing judgement and you have your own doubts and questions. It is not easy to get through this and can take a heavy toll. Actually, it is not can, it will certainly take a heavy toll.

Here are some of my learnings from this phase -

1. **It is my life and I get to decide** – Once I made the decision to move away, I was committed to that and hence looked for ways to make it work. Second guessing and doubting your decision will not help. You should have done that before you broke off. Trust your intelligence and back yourself. Unless you believe, nobody else will believe in you.
2. **Society just wants status quo** – Our extended families in particular will always try to tell you to reconcile. They will give you the cliched guidance that all marriages have problems and you just need to make adjustments etc. etc. What I realised with time is that all they are interested in is status quo. Society does not like people making unconventional decisions and hence tries to push you back to the “normal”. The fun part is that, if you give it time, you new separate / divorced status becomes the new normal and life moves on. So don’t bother about this noise. None of these people will offer to feed your kids for a day!
3. **Accept that you need help** – This phase is tough. You will try and be both parents for your kids. Plus you need to worry about making a living. This is a 36 hour role and you just cant do it in 24 hours even if you had all the skills. I learnt to lean on friends to cook on weekends, help with the kids homework and exam preps, babysit the kids so that I could step out. I also taught the kids to be independent. They learnt basic cooking, learnt to make new friends, learnt to look after each other – all life skills that I am sure they find handy now. In addition, get good domestic help to take care of daily stuff – cooking, cleaning etc.
4. **Cut the clutter and focus on what is important** – One of the toughest things for me was to be in the family court. Being a male everyone assumed that I was the guilty party. Almost all of them, including the judge, would assume that kids were with my ex-wife and I had to remind them everytime that I was the parent here! These court hearings were so painful that my health was getting impacted. The best advise I got from the doctor was to cut out anything that caused me stress. I realised that court hearings did not matter as I already had custody of my children and hence I stopped bothering. As time passed, I and the kids learnt to make the court hearings an event. We would make sure we got good food or went for a game or something else to take our mind off the stress.
5. **Accept the cost** – Finally, do not believe that you can do everything and be perfect at everything. This is a phase in your life when you need to prioritise your kids and yourself. It will mean that you need to take a little bit of a step back professionally. I went and asked my organisation to allow me to work from home after regular hours. I had to take a less stressful job. The cost was paid in slower professional growth and salary increments but it allowed me to be a single parent for my kids.

These are my experiences in dealing with the aftermath of a broken marriage. I am sure you have your own lessons. Please do share so that others can also benefit.